Anonymous
Sermon on The Mount Matthew
seeing the multitudes he went up into
a mountain and when he was set his
disciples came unto Him and he opened
his mouth and he taught them saying
blessed are the poor in spirit for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven blessed
are they that mourn for they shall be
comforted blessed are the meek for they
shall inherit the earth blessed are they
which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness for they shall be filled
blessed are the merciful for they shall
obtain mercy blessed are the pure in
heart for they shall see God
blessed are the peacemakers for they
shall be called the children of God
blessed are they which are persecuted
for righteousness sake for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven blessed are ye when
men shall revile you and persecute you
and shall say all manner of evil against
you falsely for my sake rejoice and be
exceeding glad for great is your reward
in heaven so persecuted they the
prophets which were before you near the
salt of the earth but if the salt have
lost his savour wherewith shall it be
salted it is thence forth good for
nothing but to be cast out and to be
trodden under foot of men
you're the light of the world a city
that set on a hill cannot be hid and
neither do men light a candle and put it
under a bushel but on a candlestick and
it giveth light unto all that are in the
house let your light so shine before men
that they may see your good works and
glorify your father which is in heaven
think not that I'm coming to destroy the
law or the prophets I'm not come to
destroy but to fulfil for verily I say
unto you till heaven and earth pass one
jot or one tittle shall no wise pass
from the law till all be fulfilled
whosoever therefore shall break one of
these least Commandments and shall teach
men so he shall be called the least in
the kingdom of heaven but whosoever
shall do and teach them the same shall
be called great in the kingdom of heaven
for I say unto you that except your
righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the scribes and
Pharisees he shall no case enter into
the kingdom of heaven ye have heard that
it said of them of old time thou shalt
not kill and whosoever shall kill shall
be in danger of the judgment but I say
unto you that whosoever is angry with
his brother without a cause shall be in
danger of the judgment and whosoever
shall say to his brother raca shall be
in danger of the council whosoever shall
say thou fool shall be in danger of
hellfire
therefore if thou bring thy gift to the
altar and there rememberest that thy
brother hath ought against thee leave
there thy gift before the altar and go
thy way first be reconciled to thy
brother and then come and offer thy gift
agree with thine adversary quickly while
thou art in the way with him lest at any
time the adversary deliver thee to the
judge and the judge deliver thee to the
officer and thou be cast into prison
verily I say unto thee thou shalt by no
means come out thence till thou hast
paid the uttermost farthing you've heard
that it was said by them of old time
thou shalt not commit adultery but I say
unto you that whosoever looketh on a
woman to lust after her hath committed
adultery with her already in his heart
and if thy right eye offend thee pluck
it out and cast it from thee for it is
profitable for thee that one of thy
members should perish and not that thy
whole body should be cast into hell
and if thy right hand offend thee cut it
off and cast it from thee for it is
profitable for thee that one of thy
members should perish and not that thy
whole body should be cast into hell it
hath been said whosoever shall put away
his wife let him give her a writing of
divorcement but i say unto you that
whosoever should put away his wife
saving for the cause of fornication
causeth her to commit adultery and
whosoever shall marry her that is
divorced committeth adultery again you
have heard that it hath been said by
them of old time thou shalt not forswear
thyself thou shalt perform unto the Lord
thy notes but I say unto you swear not
at all neither by heaven for his God's
throne little by the earth for it is his
footstool neither by jerusalem floors
the city of the Great King neither shalt
thou swear by thy head because thou
canst not make one hair white or black
let your communication be a yeh nay nay
for whatsoever is more than these cometh
of evil you have heard that it hath been
said an eye for an eye and a tooth for
tooth but ice and to you that you is
this not evil but whosoever shall smite
thee on thy right cheek turn to him the
other also and if any man will sue thee
at law and take away thy coat let him
have that cloak also and whosoever shall
compel thee to go a mile go with him
Twain give to him that asketh thee and
from him that would borrow of thee turn
not thou away you've heard that have
been said thou shalt love thy neighbour
and hate thine enemy but I said do you
love your enemies bless them that curse
you do good to them that hate you and
pray for them which despitefully use you
and persecute you that you may be the
children of your father which is in
heaven for he maketh his Sun to rise on
the evil and the good and sendeth rain
on the just and on the unjust for if you
love them which love you what reward
have ye do not even the publicans the
same if you salute your brethren only
what do you more than the others do not
even the publicans so be therefore
perfect even as your father which is in
heaven is perfect
take heed that you do not your alms
before men to be seen of them otherwise
you have no reward of your father which
is in heaven therefore when thou doest
thine alms
do you not sound a trumpet before thee
as the hypocrites do in the synagogues
and in the streets that they may have
glory of men verily I say to you they
have their reward but when thou doest
alms let not thy left hand know what thy
right hand doeth that thine alms may be
in secret and thy father which seeth in
secret himself shall reward thee openly
and when thou prayest thou shalt not be
as the hypocrites are for they love to
pray standing in the synagogues and in
the corners of the streets that they may
be seen of men verily I say unto you
they have their reward but thou when
thou prayest enter into that closet and
when thou hast shut thy door pray to thy
father which is in secret and thy father
which seeth in secret shall reward thee
openly but when you pray use not vain
repetitions as the heathen do for they
think that they shall be heard for their
much speaking be not therefore like unto
them for your father knoweth what things
ye have need of before you ask him after
this manner therefore pray ye our Father
which art in heaven hallowed be thy name
thy kingdom come thy will be done in
earth as it is in heaven give us this
day our daily bread and forgive us our
debts as we forgive our debtors and lead
us not into temptation but deliver us
from evil for thine is the kingdom and
the power and the glory forever amen
for if you forgive men their trespasses
your heavenly Father will also forgive
you but if you forgive not men their
trespasses neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses moreover when
you fast be not as the hypocrites of a
sad countenance for they disfigure their
faces that they may appear unto men to
fast verily I say unto you they have
their reward but thou when thou fastest
anoint thine head and wash thy face
I thought pure not unto men to fast but
unto thy father which is in secret and
thy father which seeth in secret shall
reward thee openly they not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth where
moth and rust doth corrupt and where
thieves break through and steal but lay
up for yourselves treasures in heaven
where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt
and where thieves do not break through
nor steal for where your treasure is
there will your heart be also
the light of the body is the eye if
therefore thine eye be single thy whole
body shall be full of light but if finai
be evil thy whole body shall be full of
darkness if therefore the light that is
in thee be darkness how great is that
darkness no man can serve two masters
for either he will hate the one and love
the other or else he will hold to the
one and despise the other you cannot
serve God and Mammon therefore I say
unto you take no thought for your life
what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink
nor yet for your body what ye shall put
on is not the life more than meat and
the body than raiment behold the fowls
of the air for they sow not neither do
they reap nor gather into barns yet your
heavenly Father feedeth them are ye not
much better than they which of you by
taking thought can add one cubit into
his stature and why take ye thought for
raiment consider the lilies of the field
how they grow they toil not neither do
they spend and yet I say unto you that
even Solomon in all his glory was not
arrayed like one of these wherefore if
God so clothe the grass of the field
which today is and tomorrow's cast into
the oven shall he not much more clothe
you O ye of little faith therefore take
no Thought saying what shall we eat or
what shall we drink or wherewithal shall
we be clothed for after all these things
do the Gentiles seek
for your heavenly Father knoweth that
you have need of these things I seek you
first the kingdom of God His
righteousness and all these things shall
be added unto you
take therefore no thought for the morrow
for the morrow shall take thought for
the things of itself sufficient unto the
day is the evil thereof judge not the be
not judged fourth what judgment ye judge
ye shall be judged and with what measure
ye mete it shall be measured to you
again and why beholdest thou the mote
that is in thy brother's eye but
considerest not the beam that is in
thine own eye or how wilt thou say to
thy brother let me pull out the mote of
thine eye and behold a beam is in thine
own eye
thou hypocrite first cast out the beam
out of thine own eye and then shalt thou
see clearly to cast out the mote out of
thy brother's eye give not that which is
holy unto the dogs neither cast ye your
pearls before swine lest they trample
them under their feet and turn again and
rend you asking it shall be given you
seek and ye shall find knock and it
shall be opened unto you for every one
that asketh receiveth and he that
seeketh findeth and to him that knocketh
it shall be opened or what man is there
of you whom if his son ask bread will
give him a stone or if he ask a fish
will he give him a serpent if he then
being evil know how to give good gifts
unto your children how much more shall
your father which is in heaven give good
things to them that ask him therefore
all things whatsoever you would that men
should do to you do ye even so to them
for this is the law and the prophets
entry in at the strait gate for wide is
the gate and broad is the way that
leadeth to destruction and many there be
which go in thereat because Strait is
the gate and narrow is the way which
leadeth unto life and few there be to
find it beware of false prophets which
come to you in sheep's clothing but
inwardly they are ravening wolves shall
know them by their fruits do men gather
grapes of thorns or figs of thistles
even so every good tree bringeth forth
good fruit but a corrupt tree bringeth
forth evil fruit a good tree cannot
bring forth evil fruit neither can a
corrupt tree bring forth good fruit
every tree that bringeth not forth good
fruit is hewn down and cast into the
fire wherefore by their fruits ye shall
know them not everyone that saith unto
me Lord Lord shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven but he that doeth the
will of my father which is in heaven
many will say to me in that day Lord
Lord have we not prophesied in thy name
and in thy name have cast out devils and
in thy name done many wonderful works
and then I will profess unto them I
never knew you depart from me either
worked iniquity therefore whosoever
heareth these sayings of mine and doeth
them I will liken him until wise a man
which built his house upon a rock and
the rain descended and the floods came
and the winds blew and beat upon that
house and it fell not for it was founded
upon a rock and every one that heareth
these sayings of mine and doeth them not
shall be likened unto a foolish man
which built his house upon the sand and
the rain descended and the floods came
and the winds blew and beat upon that
house and it fell and great was the fall
of it